📘 Introduction of Python
Python is a high-level programming language used to perform tasks by giving instructions to the computer.
Python is easy to learn and simple to use, especially for beginners.
One of the main advantages of Python is that we do not need to declare data types explicitly.
Python automatically identifies the data type based on the value assigned.
Python was developed by Guido van Rossum.
Python is an independent programming language, which means we do not need to learn any other language before learning Python.

Python is widely used in many fields such as:
Web Development
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Machine Learning (ML)
Data Science
Automation
Python can also integrate easily with other programming languages, tools, and technologies, which makes it very powerful and popular.

💻 IDE (Integrated Development Environment)
An IDE (Integrated Development Environment) is a software tool used to write, run, and debug programs easily.
Python development, Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is one of the most commonly used IDEs.
VS Code itself is a lightweight tool, but it becomes powerful by installing extensions.

VS Code Extensions for Python
Python Extension
Used to write, execute, and debug Python programs
Provides features like syntax highlighting and error checking

Extension
Used to work with Jupyter Notebooks
Helpful for data analysis, visualization, and experimentation
By using these extensions, VS Code becomes a complete environment for Python application development.

🧾 Variables in Python
A variable is used to store data (values) in a program.
Computers cannot remember a value for a long time unless it is stored.
So, we use variables to store values and reuse them whenever needed.
When we assign a value to a variable once, we can retrieve (reuse) the same value multiple times in the program without typing it again.
Example
x = 10
Here, x is a variable that stores the value 10.
We can use x anywhere in the program to get the same value.

Why we use variables
To store data
To reuse values
To make programs easy to read and understand
To avoid repeating the same value again and again

🧾 Types of Variables in Python
Python lo variables scope & location prakaram classify chestaru.

1. Local Variable
Where Defined: Inside a function/method of a class
Scope: Only inside that function
Usage: Temporary data for the function

Example:
class Student:
    def show(self):
        x = 10   # local variable
        print(x)

student1 = Student()
student1.show()  # Output: 10
# print(x) → Error

2. Global Variable
Where Defined: Outside all classes and functions
Scope: Can be used anywhere in the program
Example:
x = 20  # global variable

class Student:
    def show(self):
        print(x)  # can use global variable

student1 = Student()
student1.show()  # Output: 20

3. Instance Variable
Where Defined: Inside class using self
Scope: Unique for each object
Usage: Object-specific data
Example:

class Student:
    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.name = name  # instance variable
        self.age = age    # instance variable

student1 = Student("Devi", 22)
student2 = Student("Ravi", 25)

print(student1.name)  # Devi
print(student2.name)  # Ravi

4. Class Variable
Where Defined: Inside class but outside all functions
Scope: Shared by all objects of the class
Usage: Common data for all objects

Example:

class Student:
    college = "ABC College"  # class variable

    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name     # instance variable

student1 = Student("Devi")
student2 = Student("Ravi")

print(student1.college)  # ABC College
print(student2.college)  # ABC College

Quick Notebook Table
Variable Type                        	Defined                                 Where	Scope/Usage
Local Variable	                Inside class function/method	               Only inside that function
Global Variable	                Outside all classes & functions             	Anywhere in program
Instance Variable            	  Inside class                                  using self	Unique for each object
Class Variable	                Inside class, outside functions             	Shared by all objects of class

💡 Shortcut for memory
Local → function only
Global → anywhere
Instance → per object
Class → shared by all objects ✅
